seatuya
=======

A C wrapper library for tuyapp, providing a stable C ABI for
controlling Tuya / Smart Life devices locally and via the cloud.
Supports protocol versions 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5.


Why seatuya?
------------

The Tuya ecosystem already has two solid libraries: tuyapp (C++) and
tinytuya (Python).  Both work well, but both lock you into a single
language.  If you want to talk to a Tuya device from Lua, Tcl,
newLISP, Forth, Zig, Nim, or anything else that can call a C
function, you are out of luck.

seatuya fixes that.  It wraps tuyapp's C++ internals behind a plain C
API with a stable ABI: opaque handles, no templates, no exceptions, no
mangled symbols.  Any language with a foreign-function interface (FFI)
can link to libseatuya and control Tuya devices directly, without
shelling out to Python or embedding a C++ runtime.

The newLISP modules shipped in this repository are a proof of concept.
newLISP has no Tuya support of its own and never will.  But with
seatuya installed, a 200-line FFI wrapper (seatuya.lsp) gives it the
full local-control API, and a 530-line script (seatuya-wizard.lsp)
replicates the entire tinytuya wizard -- cloud authentication, device
enumeration, UDP scanning, config generation -- in a language the Tuya
developers have never heard of.  That is the point: write the C
library once, and every language gets Tuya for free.


Advantages over tinytuya and tuyapp
------------------------------------

1. No runtime dependencies.  seatuya-wizard is a statically-linked
   binary.  Copy it to a machine and run it.  No Python, no pip, no
   venv, no requirements.txt, no resolving version conflicts between
   cryptography, pyOpenSSL, requests, and urllib3.  It works on a bare
   Debian container, a FreeBSD jail, or a Raspberry Pi with nothing
   installed.  tinytuya pulls in 15+ transitive Python packages and
   breaks when any of them ships an incompatible update.

2. Any language gets Tuya for free.  tuyapp locks you into C++,
   tinytuya locks you into Python.  seatuya exposes opaque handles,
   C strings, and ints across the ABI boundary.  If your language can
   call dlopen, it can control Tuya devices.  The newLISP modules
   prove this: 200 lines of FFI wrapping, and a language with zero
   IoT ecosystem gets full local control and a cloud wizard.  The
   same works for Lua, Tcl, Forth, Zig, Nim, Janet, Racket --
   whatever you prefer.

3. Portable across every major platform.  Builds with standard
   autotools on Linux (any distribution), macOS, FreeBSD, OpenBSD,
   NetBSD, and Windows.  Starter packaging for 10 distributions is
   included under dist/.  tinytuya only works where Python works
   well, which excludes embedded systems, minimal containers, and
   BSDs where Python packaging is a constant headache.

4. Self-contained wizard with no cloud SDK.  tinytuya's wizard
   requires the requests library, a working Python SSL stack, and a
   compatible cryptography package (which itself needs Rust to
   compile from source on some platforms).  seatuya-wizard does
   HTTPS with libtls or raw OpenSSL BIOs, HMAC-SHA256 with
   libcrypto, and JSON with a small built-in parser.  Everything the
   wizard needs is either in the binary or in libc.  No supply
   chain, no PyPI, no Rust toolchain surprise.

5. Predictable, auditable behavior.  A C library with a manpage, a
   clean header, and no magic.  No monkey-patching, no dynamic
   dispatch, no import-time side effects.  The entire public API
   fits in one header file.  You can read it, understand it, and
   trust it on a system where reliability matters -- a production
   IoT gateway, a brewery controller, an HVAC system.  When
   tinytuya updates and changes its internal retry logic or cloud
   API parsing, you get the new behavior whether you wanted it or
   not.  seatuya's ABI does not change out from under you.


What is included
----------------

Library (C ABI):
  libseatuya.so / libseatuya.a    shared and static library
  seatuya/seatuya.h               public header (pure C17)
  seatuya.3                        section 3 manpage

newLISP modules:
  find-lib.lsp         cross-platform shared-library discovery
  crypto-fast.lsp      complete libcrypto FFI wrapper (replaces
                        the built-in crypto.lsp with native calls,
                        caller-owned buffers, SHA3, HMAC, PBKDF2,
                        CSPRNG)
  libtls.lsp           libtls FFI wrapper for HTTPS
  seatuya.lsp          newLISP bindings for libseatuya

Example programs (C):
  sousvide-ramp        temperature ramp controller for Inkbird
                        sous vide devices
  seatuya-wizard       cloud wizard (libtls backend)
  seatuya-wizard-openssl  cloud wizard (OpenSSL backend)

Example programs (newLISP):
  sousvide-ramp.lsp    same ramp controller, pure newLISP via FFI
  seatuya-wizard.lsp   full tinytuya wizard clone in newLISP

Distribution packaging:
  dist/                starter packaging for RPM, Debian, Arch,
                        Alpine, Gentoo, Slackware, FreeBSD, OpenBSD,
                        NetBSD, and NixOS (see README.distributions)


Building
--------

    ./fetch-deps.sh        # fetches tuyapp (and jsoncpp if not installed)
    autoreconf -fi
    ./configure
    make
    make check
    make install

Dependencies are fetched on demand by fetch-deps.sh -- nothing
third-party is shipped in the repository.  System-installed libraries
are preferred when available.

If libtls is available, the libtls-based wizard is also built.
configure will detect it automatically and print a hint with the
install command for your distribution if it is missing.


Dependencies
------------

Required:
  OpenSSL or LibreSSL      system crypto library
  A C17 compiler           gcc 8+, clang 6+, MSVC 2019+
  A C++14 compiler         for building tuyapp internals
  GNU autotools            autoconf, automake, libtool (from git only)

Fetched automatically:
  tuyapp                   C++ Tuya protocol library
  jsoncpp                  JSON parser (system copy preferred)

Optional:
  libtls                   for the libtls wizard variant
  newLISP 10.7+            for the newLISP examples and modules


Using from other languages
--------------------------

The whole point of seatuya is that you do not need to use C.  After
`make install`, any language with FFI can load libseatuya.so and call
its functions.  The API uses only C types: pointers to opaque structs,
char pointers, ints, and enums.  No C++ types cross the ABI boundary.

A minimal FFI session in pseudocode:

    lib = load("libseatuya.so")
    dev = lib.seatuya_create("3.4")
    lib.seatuya_connect(dev, "192.168.1.100")
    lib.seatuya_negotiate_session(dev, "your_local_key_here")
    buf = allocate(1024)
    n = lib.seatuya_build_message(dev, buf, 10, '{"devId":"...","dps":{"1":true}}', "key")
    lib.seatuya_send(dev, buf, n)
    n = lib.seatuya_receive(dev, buf, 1024, 0)
    response = lib.seatuya_decode_message(dev, buf, n, "key")
    lib.seatuya_destroy(dev)

See seatuya.lsp for a real-world example of this pattern in newLISP.
The same approach works in Python ctypes, Lua FFI, Ruby FFI, Tcl,
Zig, Nim, Racket, Janet, or anything else that can call C functions.


License
-------

BSD-2-Clause.  See COPYING for details.

tuyapp is licensed under GPL-3.0+ (see deps/tuyapp/LICENSE after fetch).
jsoncpp is licensed under MIT (see deps/jsoncpp/LICENSE after fetch).
